---
layout: post
title: "Time-to-overwhelm: A KPI for big projects"
date: 2023-05-19
---

Lately I've been pitching an idea to colleagues that pertains to big and complicated projects. In my own work, it's an idea that I've found useful for navigating the scope and stages of a problem I've been working on. The core thesis is as follows: Solving important problems inevitably leads to feeling some degree of being overwhelmed, and critically, the earlier this feeling occurs in the project, the better. Let's elaborate.

For the sake of argument, let's state that the extent to which one is overwhelmed loosely reflects the size and importance of the task. By general intuition, big and important problems are inherently more overwhelming compared to simpler problems due to their greater complexity, aperture, and potential impact. In these cases, you *will* be overwhelmed at some point, so the trick is to have some agency over *when* you'll be overwhelmed.

We usually face some degree of being overwhelemed in early stages of projects. At the start, the process of a) scoping out and recognizing the challenges that lie ahead, b) identifying the problem's knowns and unknowns, and c) mapping out the problem's the depth and breadth, is a crucial step in a project's development. This is essentially taking a birds-eye view of a project and seeing the entirety, to the best of our abilities, of what lies ahead. The more thorough we are in this process, the more we realize what needs to be done, and thus the more likely we will encounter feelings of being overwhelmed. 

Therefore, we can treat the sense of being overwhelmed as a indicator of how extensively a project is mapped out. To reiterate, the more you are initially overwhelmed, the more you have initially scoped out the project. Important to note here is that the sooner this state is achieved, the better; a fast time-to-overwhelm is exactly what you want. You know what lies ahead much sooner. Although not perfect, and certainly subjective, time-to-overwhelm could be used as a loose key performance indicator (KPI) that also helps find comfort in being overwhelmed in general. It's a good thing.

Contrast this to getting overwhelmed late in a project. Deadlines aside, if this occurs late in the game, it's probably because one or more of the points *a-c* above were underestimated at the start. Suddenly becoming aware of just how complicated and deep the problem you're working on, *while you're knee deep in it*, brings a different, more dreaded, sense of overwhelmed--you're both too far in and too far out. The goal is to prevent this, which, of course, is easier said than done.

Another obvious yet important point: Experience and expertise is critical for properly scoping and planning a project out, and therefore achieving a fast time-to-overwhelm. The best way to get deep and wide expertise? Assembling a team with diverse perspectives and backgrounds that collectively include varied arrays of knowledge, opinion, and ideas. The more heterogenous a given team is, the more likely the project gotcha's and unknown unknowns are unveiled. An added bonus: being communally overwhelmed together is a lot more enjoyable than being overwhelmed alone.