---
layout: post
title: "On hearing loss (again)"
date: 2023-01-10
---

Recently I had a conversation about my [previous post](/blog/2020/on-hearing-loss/) with a dear friend, who encouraged me to continue sharing my experiences with hearing loss. The conversation centered around the invisibility aspect of hearing loss, and this post serves to more broadly discuss those points from the previous post. 

Invisible disabilities are disabilities that have no immediately obvious tells, and therefore they often go unnoticed. These disabilities can be anything from chronic pain and fatigue, chronic illness, and mental illness. As I mentioned in the previous post, hearing loss can fall into this category because hearing loss can be physically hidden (i.e. discrete hearing aids or no hearing aids at all) as well as masked by highly adaptive coping mechanisms, giving the illusion of normal function. The burden thus falls on the individual to be a constant advocate for themselves.

In my case, being young is an added layer of invisibility and burden. Generally as a society, we implicitly recognize that hearing decreases as we get older, and as such we tend to (not always) behave with more compassion, understanding, and patience when an older individual is struggling to hear. From my experience, this is not the case when you're young. Understandably, people tend have the more-often-right-than-wrong assumption that young people have normal hearing; this is a good model of the world that fits the data well and it doesn't really make sense to radically update it. However, this means that I have to really fight to get that patience and understanding. And even when I do, it is almost always fleeting. I'm comfortable with this--I have to be--and I don't resent it, but the burden can certainly over-accumulate at times.

Further, I think people underestimate just how far-reaching the impacts of hearing loss can be. In my previous post, I discussed how hearing loss affects my life in academia. But the reality is that my hearing loss is a core component of my identity that influences every single aspect of my life. I don't know what life is like without having to factor it in into every decision I make, social interaction I have, and action I take. And speaking candidly, the challenges my hearing brings has pushed me in ways that have made my life richer; I feel more empowered, driven, open, and compassionate. I will not let it hold me back, and I am so fortunate and grateful to be able to say that. Yet, I can't help but feel unsettled that something so fundamental to my identity is often entirely invisible.

I can only speak to my experience, but it is critical to note that not everyone is open to sharing their invisible disability. As for me, I tend to be a pretty open person in general. Importantly, there is no social stigma attached to my disability. I am also incredibly fortunate to have access to technology and professionals that help me navigate this disability. But unfortunately, that's not the case for everyone. We as a society need to do better to build in systems of support and compassion for those individuals who do not have the luxury of being able to speak up. A good guiding principle is to assume nothing except that everyone has a unique story that is beyond your immediate comprehension. Act always with compassion.

The way to turn invisibility into visibility is through conversation and allyship. However, conversation and communication only serves as an approximate for the true, lived-in, visceral experience. It is difficult to put words to the intangibles. But, it's how we start.
